






EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
2


IMPORTANT NOTICE
Scoring:
Scoring must be in the range from 0-5. Half-marks may  be given.
0 —  The proposal fails to address the criterion or cannot be assessed due to missing or
incomplete information.
1 — Poor. The criterion is inadequately addressed, or there are serious inherent
weaknesses.
2 — Fair. The proposal broadly addresses the criterion, but there are significant
weaknesses.
3 — Good. The proposal addresses the criterion well, but a number of shortcomings are
present.
4 — Very Good. The proposal addresses the criterion very well, but a small number of
shortcomings are present.
5 — Excellent. The proposal successfully addresses all relevant aspects of the criterion.
Any shortcomings are minor.
Thresholds & weighting:
The threshold for  the Excellence criterion is 4, for the Impact criterion is 3 and for  the Quality and
efficiency of the implementation criterion is 3.
Weighting is only used for the ranking (not to determine if the proposal passed the thresholds).
 Specific calls or topics may have different rules regarding threshols and weighting.
Specific cases:
Two-stage calls
For stage 1  proposals, only the criteria Excellence and Impact will be evaluated  and within those
criteria only the aspects indicated in bold in General Annex of the Main Work Programme.  The
threshold for each of the two individual criteria is 4.
After the evaluation, the call coordinator will then fix an overall threshold, to limit the proposals that
will be invited to stage 2. (This overall threshold will be set at a level which ensures that the total
requested budget of proposals admitted to stage 2 is as close as possible to three times the available
budget, and in any case, not less than 2.5 the available budget. The actual level will therefore depend
on the volume of proposals received. The threshold is expected to normally be around 8 or 8.5.)


EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
3



SENSITIVE

[INDIVIDUAL EVALUATION REPORT (IER)][CONSENSUS REPORT (CR)]
[EVALUATION SUMMARY REPORT]

PROJECT
Project number: [project number]
Project name: [project title]
Project acronym: [acronym]
Coordinator contact: [PCoCo name NAME], [organisation]
Call: [call ID]
Topic: [topic ID]
Type of action: [ToA ID]
Responsible service: [responsible unit, e.g. JUST/04]
Project duration: [number of months]

PARTICIPANTS
Number Role  Short name Legal name Country PIC
1 COO
2 BEN
2.1 AE
3 BEN
4 AP


EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
4
PROJECT ABSTRACT
Text from Proposal Abstract (Application Form Part A).


EVALUATION
Evaluation model: single
Panel: [insert panel identifier]
Evaluators: [name NAME], [name NAME], [name NAME]

1. EVALUATION
 Applications must be evaluated as they were submitted , NOT on their potential if certain changes were made.
Therefore, d o NOT  recommend any modifications (e.g. consortia composition, resources or budget, or inclusion of
additional work packages). Shortcomings should be reflected in lower score.
 If an application is partly out of scope, this should be reflected in the scoring and explained in the comments.

1. Excellence
The following aspects will be taken into account, to the extent that the proposed work corresponds to the
description in the work programme:
• Objectives and r elevance to the Challenge : How clearare the project’s objectives ? How relevant are
they in contributing to the overall goal and the specific objectives of the Challenge?
• Novelty: To what extent is the proposed work ambitious and goes beyond the state-of-the-art?
• Plausibility of methodology : How sound is the proposed methodology, including the underlying
concepts, models, assumptions, appropriate consideration of the gender dimension in research
content, and the quality of open science practices?
Comments:




Score 1 (0-5):
Threshold: 4/5
Weight 60%


2. Impact
The following aspects will be taken into account, to the extent that the proposed work corresponds to the
description in the work programme:
• Potential Impact: How credible are the pathways to achieve the expected outcomes and impacts of the
Challenge? To what extent would the successful completion of the project contribute to this?
EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
5
• Innovation potential: How adequate are the proposed measures for protection of results and any other
exploitation measures to facilitate future translation of research results into innovations with positive
societal, economic or environmental impact? How suitable are the proposed measures for involving
and empowering key actors that have the potential to take the lead in translating research into
innovations in the future?
• Communication and Dissemination : How suitable are the proposed measures, including
communication activities, to maximise expected outcomes and impacts for raising awareness about
the project results’ potential to establish new markets and/or address global challenges?

Comments:







Score 2 (0-5):
Threshold: 3.5/5
Weight 20%


3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation
The following aspects will be taken into account, to the extent that the proposed work corresponds to the
description in the work programme:
• Work plan : How coherent and effective are the work plan (work packages, tasks, deliverables,
milestones, timeline, etc.) and risk mitigation measures in order to achieve the project objectives?
• Allocation of resources : How appropriate and effective is the allocation of resources ( comprising
person-months and other cost items) to work packages and consortium members?
• Quality of the applicant/consortium (depends if mono or multi -beneficiaries): To what extent does the
applicant / do all consortium members have the necessary  capacity and  high quality expertise for
performing the project tasks?
Comments:

Score 3 (0-5):
Threshold: 3/5
Weight 20%


Total score



2. OTHER  QUESTIONS
Opinion on additional questions EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
6
Scope of the application
Based on the information provided, this application is:
 ‘in scope’ because it corresponds, wholly or in part, to the topic description against which it has been
submitted
 ‘out of scope’ because:
     [Comment box]
Exceptional funding
 A third country participant/international organisation not listed in the General Annex to the Main Work
Programme may exceptionally receive funding if their participation is essential for carrying out the project (for
instance due to outstanding expertise, access to unique know -how, access to research infrastructure, access to
particular geographical environments, possibility to involve key partners in emerging markets, access to data,
etc.). (For more information, see the HE programme guide)
Please list the concerned applicants and requested grant amount and explain the reasons why.
Based on the information provided, the following participants should receive exceptional funding:
       [Comment box]
Based on the information provided, the following participants should NOT receive exceptional funding:
       [Comment box]
Use of human embryonic stem cells (hESC)
Does this proposal involve the use of hESC?
No
Yes
If YES, please state whether the use of hESC is, or is not, in your opinion, necessary to achieve the scientific
objectives of the proposal and the reasons why. Alternatively, please state if it cannot be assessed whether the
use of hESC is necessary or not, because of a lack of information.
       [Comment box]
Use of human embryos
Does this proposal involve the use of human embryos?
No
Yes
If YES, please explain how the human embryos will be used in the project.
       [Comment box]
EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
7
Activities excluded from funding
Activities that:
− aim at human cloning for reproductive purposes, or
− intend to modify the genetic heritage of human beings which could make such changes heritable (with
the exception of research relating to cancer treatment of the gonads, which may be financed), or
− intend to create human embryos solely for the purpose of research or for the purpose of stem cell
procurement, including by means of somatic cell nuclear transfer, or
− lead to the destruction of human embryos (for example, for obtaining stem cells)?
are excluded from funding. Does the proposal include any of these activities?
No
Yes
If YES, please explain.
       [Comment box]
Do no significant harm principle
Is this proposal compliant with the ‘Do no significant harm’ principle?
Not applicable
Yes.
Partially
No
Cannot be assessed

If Partially/No/Cannot be assessed please explain.
       [Comment box]
Exclusive focus on civil applications
Do the activities proposed have an exclusive focus on civil applications (activities intended to be used in
military application or aims to serve military purposes cannot be funded)?
No
Yes
If NO, please explain.
       [Comment box]
EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
8
Artificial Intelligence
Do the activities proposed involve the use and/or development of AI-based systems and/or techniques?
No
Yes
If YES, the technical robustness of the proposed system must be evaluated under the appropriate criterion.

3. COMMENTS
Overall comments
[Comment box]

]
[additional OPTION for CR:
Consensus meeting
Consensus meeting minutes
[Comment box]
Minority opinion
Does this proposal have a minority opinion?
 No
 Yes
If YES, please encode the names of dissenting evaluators and the reasons:
       [Comment box]

]

[additional OPTION for ESR  (for internal use – will not be included in the ESR sent to
applicants):
Panel review
Consensus meeting minutes
[Comment box]
Proposal panel review minutes
[Comment box]

]
EU Grants: Evaluation form (HE Pathfinder Challenges): V3.0 – 29.08.2024
9

HISTORY OF CHANGES
VERSION PUBLICATION
DATE
CHANGE
1.0 18.06.2021 Initial version (new MFF).
2.0 12.10.2022 Award criteria updated according to European
Innovation Council (EIC) Work Programme 2022
3.0 29.08.2024 Award criteria updated according to European
Innovation Council (EIC) Work Programme 2024


