Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
1



PATHFINDER CHALLENGE
Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of
Cancer

EIC Work Programme reference: HORIZON-EIC-2024-PATHFINDERCHALLENGES-01-02
Call deadline date: 29/10/2025
EIC Programme Manager: Federica ZANCA

EIC will hold an Info Session on this Pathfinder Challenge topic in spring 2025. You will be able to
find the information about the Info day, when it is available, at Events - European Commission .
Participation in the meeting, although encouraged, is optional and is not required for the submission
of an application. A recording of this Info Session will be made available on EIC Pathfinder Challenges
2025 - European Commission.
Table of Contents
1.  About this document ....................................................................................................................... 2
2 Scope and objectives of the Challenge as defined in the Work Programme .................................. 2
Background and scope ........................................................................................................................ 2
Specific objectives ............................................................................................................................... 3
Expected outcomes and impacts........................................................................................................ 5
Specific conditions .............................................................................................................................. 6
References........................................................................................................................................... 6
3 Portfolio considerations for the evaluation of applications to the Challenge ................................ 7
Categories ........................................................................................................................................... 8
Portfolio considerations ..................................................................................................................... 9
4 Implementation of the Challenge portfolio .................................................................................. 10
Proposal preparation and Grant negotiations ...................................................................................... 10
Portfolio activities ............................................................................................................................. 10
Portfolio Strategic Plan ......................................................................................................................... 11
Tools though which projects can receive additional support ............................................................... 13
5. Annex 1: Template workpackage portfolio activities .................................................................... 14


Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
2

1.  About this document

The Challenge Guide serves as guidance and background for the common understanding, participation
rules and obligations for the EIC beneficiaries that are involved in the Challenge Portfolio. Contractual
Obligations are further detailed in the EIC Work Programme 2025.
The Challenge Guide is a guidance document accompanying a topic of the Pathfinder Challenge call for
proposals to provide further information about how portfolio considerations will be considered in the
evaluation of proposals for that topic.
The Challenge Guide is prepared by and under the responsibility of the relevant EIC Programme
Manager (information about the EIC Programme Managers is available on the EIC Website
(https://eic.ec.europa.eu/eic-communities/eic-programme-managers_en). It complements the Scope,
Specific Objectives, Expected Outcomes and Impacts, and Specific Conditions set out in the EIC Work
Programme by a description of the additional categories and the portfolio considerations that will be
used in portfolio building and explains how a portfolio will be built. Please note that in no case does
the Challenge Guide contradict or supplant the Work Programme text.
Following the selection of a proposals to be funded under the Challenge, the Programme Manager will
work together with the consortia of the selected projects to develop a strategic plan for the Challenge,
including a common roadmap. This strategy plan will  integrate the activities and milestones of the
individual projects into a shared set of objectives and activities across and beyond the projects. It
serves as a common basis for the project portfolio and may affect the project implementation -
including possible adjustments, reorientations, or additional support to projects. The strategic plan will
be updated in light of emerging results or issues during the implementation.
2 Scope and objectives of the Challenge as defined in the Work Programme

This section is a copy of the Challenge call in the EIC work programme text. Proposals to this Challenge
are expected to explain how they relate to and intend to go beyond the state of the art, and how they
interpret and contribute to the objectives of the Challenge.


Background and scope

Imaging is a crucial component of cancer clinical protocols, providing detailed morphological,
structural, metabolic, and functional information. However, harnessing the full potential of the data
generated through medical imaging in clinical settings remains challenging. Clinicians often struggle to
combine diverse and large-scale data into a comprehensive view of patient care, disease progression,
and treatment efficacy. The inability to seamlessly integrate and interpret diverse data sources result
in suboptimal patient outcomes and inefficiencies in the delivery of healthcare.

The integration of traditional Artificial Intelligence (AI) with medical imaging can transform healthcare,
but most existing applications are still in their infancy and must overcome a number of challenges to
accelerate adoption. These include AI applicati ons being confined to single data modalities, which
restricts their overall effectiveness (Monomodal Application); inadequate and insufficient data
training, leading to data scarcity and a lack of generalizability, making them less reliable across diverse Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
3

patient populations, including with regard to gender -sensitivity; and the lack of AI model
interpretability, as many AI systems function as "black boxes," providing little insight into their
decision-making processes. This lack of transparency limits trust  in the systems and their usability in
clinical settings.

The goal of this Pathfinder Challenge is to create interactive GenAI autonomous agents and/or a
combination of them (super -agent) that provide clinicians with a holistic end to end perspective of
patient care, throughout the entire clinical pathway. These agents aim to enhance pattern
identification, reduce inconsistencies and errors in diagnoses as well as improve cancer treatment.
While the focus is on GenAI, we also encourage the integration of other advanced AI technologies,
such as topological and geometric deep learning, neural fields, graph neural networks, etc., which can
complement and enhance the robustness and effectiveness of GenAI-based solutions in addressing the
challenges of cancer diagnosis and therapy.

The Challenge will support early-stage groundbreaking research projects that will develop and validate
novel approaches and concepts for integrating and interpreting multimodal medical imaging and
health data. Additionally, it will involve generating relia ble synthetic medical data, which will also be
pooled to form a common database and used for the development of advanced algorithms.

Specific objectives

Project proposals under this Challenge should focus on one (and only one) of the following diseases:
breast cancer, cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, brain cancer, stomach
cancer or colorectal cancer.
Each proposal should address both the following areas (at least one sub -objective from each of the
areas):

Area 1: Technological area

i. GenAI-based tools for Integrating Multidimensional Multimodal health Data

Investigate groundbreaking techniques and methodologies for developing GenAI algorithms
that combine multidimensional (e.g. time dimension, space dimension) and multimodal data
from various sources. These include multiple imaging modalities (e.g., MRI, CT,  PET, X-ray),
clinical data (e.g., electronic health records, lab results, structured and unstructured clinical
data, pathology results, genetics and –omics data, videos, knowledge databases, and other
resources). The goal is to provide a comprehensive vie w of the patient’s condition. The
developed algorithms should be capable of producing unified and actionable datasets that can
be exploited for the development of the AI tools described in Area 2 (clinical).

ii. Medical Data Augmentation

Develop GenAI  models based on groundbreaking techniques that are in the conceptual or
initial experimental phase for medical data augmentation. These models should be capable of
creating highly realistic synthetic medical data (images, genomics data, etc.) and generati ng
complementary data from existing sources (for example producing synthetic CT images from
MRI images), to support iterative cycles of model training.

iii. Medical Knowledge Representation and Integration
 Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
4

Create an initial prototype GenAI model for medical knowledge representation and
integration. This model should aim to develop a comprehensive and dynamic medical
knowledge base, to identify discrete medical imaging features associated with demographic
information and systemic conditions, to improve the interpretability of AI -based models and
extract new knowledge not previously identifiable by experts without assistance.
Area 2: Clinical Area

i. Predictive Diagnosis

Develop an interactive autonomous agent capable of assessing the likelihood of a patient
developing cancer by analysing their medical history, imaging data, and genetic information.
The agent should provide personalised health risk predictions, enabling early detection and
preventive measures.

ii. Enhance Personalized Treatment Selection

Develop novel AI algorithms and architectures that leverages multidimensional and
multimodal data integration, along with synthetic data generation, to predict the optimal
treatment pathway for specific patient conditions, as well as to forecast disease pr ogression
and treatment efficacy providing a comprehensive view of patient care.
Appropriate performance metrics should be considered for the continuous evaluation and testing of
the scientific and technical robustness (including accurately quantify uncertainties) of all developed
algorithms and architectures in Areas 1 and 2. Rigorous testing against diverse datasets is essential to
ensure that the models perform reliably across various patient demographics and conditions, thereby
reducing the risk of skewed results and ensuring precision from diagnoses to therapy.

Projects should also conduct proof of concept studies in controlled settings to demonstrate improved
and more accurate diagnosis and treatment when compared to current clinical practice. The viability
of the developed technologies should be evaluated, guiding further refinement and improvement. For
instance, a super-agent could be validated for assisting and/or replacing clinicians through the whole
clinical pathway of the patient, providing a holistic view of patient care, that is currently unachievable
due to fragmented healthcare systems and associated expertise.

The focus should also be on enhancing the interpretability of AI models/agents, making their decision-
making processes more transparent and understandable to clinicians. This could involve developing
cutting-edge techniques such as causal inference methods , explainable AI frameworks, or novel
visualization tools that provide deeper insights into AI decision-making processes.

The AI models developed under this Challenge are expected to comply with the EU concept for
Trustworthy AI1, relevant ethical principles2, and the AI Act 3. In addition to focusing on performance,
careful attention must be given to data quality, transparency, privacy, and security.

Proposers are encouraged to leverage the data and tools available in the Cancer Image Europe
platform4 (deployed in the context of the European Cancer Imaging Initiative5) for their proposed work.

1 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
2 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2019/640163/EPRS_BRI(2019)640163_EN.pdf
3 Regulation - EU - 2024/1689 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
4 https://cancerimage.eu/
5 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/cancer-imaging Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
5

In turn they should contribute the datasets, and developed AI tools and models to the platform under
agreed conditions. All datasets produced should be described where possible with metadata records
in the EU dataset catalogue of the European Health Data S pace (EHDS) using the Health DCAT -AP6
metadata standard.

Projects that address only one of the two ‘Areas’ or other cancer types will be considered "out" of
scope.

Expected outcomes and impacts

In support of the European AI Strategy7 and the Cancer Plan for Europe8 and the Cancer Mission9 this
Challenge looks to support the development of the next generation models for cancer diagnosis and
treatment, with Generative AI.

This Challenge aims to create a collaborative environment where diverse expertise —including for
example data science, informatics, oncology, radiology, pathology, medical physics, bioinformatics,
geneticists, healthcare administrators, and patient advocac y groups — converges to address the
complexities of developing autonomous agents for holistic patient care, through enhanced diagnosis
and personalized treatment.

The Challenge aspires to significantly improve patient care and reduce pressure on the healthcare
system by leveraging advanced interactive autonomous agents for diagnosis and personalized
treatment. By alleviating the burdens on clinicians and ensuring co mpliance with the EU concept for
Trustworthy AI, the initiative will enhance the quality and reliability of medical services. Economically,
it promises substantial cost reductions and cost avoidance, leading to long -term improvements in
healthcare efficiency and sustainability. Ultimately, this challenge will foster innovation and establish
Europe as a leader in the field, delivering profound benefits to patients, healthcare providers, and
society at large.

The portfolio of selected projects will be designed to deliver a set of agents/models for improved
diagnosis and personalized treatment of the above -mentioned cancers. Specifically, the projects will
collaborate to:
- Create a shared database of synthetically generated images to be used across all projects for
the development of their algorithms;
- Compare the use of a combination of the agents in the case of multiple cancers;
- Benchmark agents for enhanced diagnosis and personalized treatment selection;
- Define innovative clinical pathways in oncology;
- Externally validate the developed agents within a project at clinical premises of another project
in the portfolio;
- Develop standardized methods and frameworks for evaluating AI - Act and Medical Device
Regulation (MDR)- compliant generative AI models.
The portfolio of projects to be funded under this Challenge will be composed in such a way that they
address ideally all cancers mentioned in this call, apply different technologies, and provide access to

6 https://healthdcat-ap.github.io/
7 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-approach-artificial-intelligence
8 https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/promoting-our-european-way-
life/european-health-union/cancer-plan-europe_en
9 https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-open-
calls/horizon-europe/eu-missions-horizon-europe/eu-mission-cancer_en Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
6

relevant clinical facilities and research infrastructures. The following categories will be used for the
composition:

Category 1 – type of cancer
Category 2 – type of technology
Category 3 – access to appropriate infrastructure data and ecosystem integration.

Specific conditions

Applications for this Challenge with elements that concern the evolution of European communication
networks (5G, post -5G and other technologies linked to the evolution of European communication
networks) will be subject to restriction for the protection of European communication networks.

References

The following references are just examples and are not exhaustive.
1. Raza, M.M., Venkatesh, K.P. & Kvedar, J.C. Generative AI and large language models in health
care: pathways to implementation. npj Digit. Med.  7, 62 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00988-4
2. Reddy S. Generative AI in healthcare: an implementation science informed translational path
on application, integration and governance. Implement Sci.  2024 Mar 15;19(1):27. doi:
10.1186/s13012-024-01357-9. PMID: 38491544; PMCID: PMC10941464.
3. Meskó B, Topol EJ. The imperative for regulatory oversight of large language models (or
generative AI) in healthcare. NPJ Digit Med.  2023 Jul 6;6(1):120. doi: 10.1038/s41746 -023-
00873-0. PMID: 37414860; PMCID: PMC10326069.
4. Shokrollahi, Y., Yarmohammadtoosky, S., Nikahd, M., Dong, P., Li, X., & Gu, L. (2023). A
Comprehensive Review of Generative AI in Healthcare. IACAPAP ArXiv. 47.
5. Kraljevic Z, Bean D, Shek A, Bendayan R, Hemingway H, Yeung JA, Deng A, Baston A, Ross J,
Idowu E, Teo JT, Dobson RJB. Foresight -a generative pretrained transformer for modelling of
patient timelines using electronic health records: a retrospective modelling study. Lancet Digit
Health. 2024 Apr;6(4)
doi: 10.1016/S2589-7500(24)00025-6. PMID: 38519155; PMCID: PMC11220626.
6. Huynh E, Hosny A, Guthier C, Bitterman DS, Petit SF, Haas-Kogan DA, Kann B, Aerts HJWL, Mak
RH. Artificial intelligence in radiation oncology. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2020 Dec;17(12):771-781.
doi: 10.1038/s41571-020-0417-8. Epub 2020 Aug 25. PMID: 32843739.
7. Bera K, Schalper KA, Rimm DL, Velcheti V, Madabhushi A. Artificial intelligence in digital
pathology - new tools for diagnosis and precision oncology. Nat Rev Clin Oncol.  2019
Nov;16(11):703-715. doi: 10.1038/s41571 -019-0252-y. Epub 2019 Aug 9. PMID: 31399699;
PMCID: PMC6880861.
8. Koohi-Moghadam M, Bae KT. Generative AI in Medical Imaging: Applications, Challenges, and
Ethics. J Med Syst. 2023 Aug 31;47(1):94. doi: 10.1007/s10916-023-01987-4. PMID: 37651022.
9. Yi, X., Walia, E., Babyn, P. Generative adversarial network in medical imaging: A review.
Medical Image Analysis , 58, 2019, 101552. ISSN 1361 -8415.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.101552. Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
7

10. Lipkova, J., Chen, R.J., Chen, B., Lu, M.Y., Barbieri, M., Shao, D., Vaidya, A.J., Chen, C., Zhuang,
L., Williamson, D.F.K., Shaban, M., Chen, T.Y., Mahmood, F. Artificial intelligence for
multimodal data integration in oncology. Cancer Cell, 40(10), 2022, 1095 -1110. ISSN 1535 -
6108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2022.09.012.
11. Boehm, K.M., et al. Harnessing Multimodal Data Integration to Advance Precision Oncology.
Nature Reviews Cancer, 22(2), 2022, 114-126.
12. Chen, R.J., Lu, M.Y., Chen, T.Y. et al. Synthetic data in machine learning for medicine and
healthcare. Nat Biomed Eng, 5, 493–497 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-00751-
8.
13. Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T. et al. Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature, 620,
172–180 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06291-2.
14. Guevara M., Chen S., Thomas S., Chaunzwa T.L., Franco I., Kann B.H., Moningi S., Qian J.M.,
Goldstein M., Harper S., Aerts H.J.W.L., Catalano P.J., Savova G.K., Mak R.H., Bitterman D.S.
Large language models to identify social determinants of health in ele ctronic health records.
npj Digital Medicine, 7(1), 2024. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00970-0.
15. Jiang, L.Y., Liu, X.C., Nejatian, N.P. et al. Health system -scale language models are all-purpose
prediction engines. Nature, 619, 357–362 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06160-
y.
16. Yang, Z., Mitra, A., Liu, W. et al. TransformEHR: transformer -based encoder -decoder
generative model to enhance prediction of disease outcomes using electronic health records.
Nat Commun, 14, 7857 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43715-z.
17. Tang, A.S., Woldemariam, S.R., Miramontes, S. et al. Harnessing EHR data for health research.
Nat Med, 30, 1847–1855 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-03074-8.
18. Shmatko, A., Ghaffari Laleh, N., Gerstung, M. et al. Artificial intelligence in histopathology:
enhancing cancer research and clinical oncology. Nat Cancer , 3, 1026 –1038 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00436-4.

3 Portfolio considerations for the evaluation of applications to the Challenge

This section describes how portfolio considerations will be taken into account in the second evaluation
step. For more details of the full evaluation process please refer to the EIC Work Programme 2025 pages
28-35.

After the submission of your proposal, it will be evaluated in two steps:

1. The EIC expert evaluators will assess each proposal separately against the award criteria and
the EIC evaluation committee will ensure consistency across scores.
2. The EIC evaluation committee, consisting of EIC expert evaluators and an EIC Programme
Manager will map all the proposals above the threshold in a number of categories, sub -
categories and elements stemming from the overall goal and specific objectives of the
Challenge. Examples of possible categories are building blocks or subsystems, technical areas
and/or competing technologies, platforms, applications areas, risk level and stage of
technology readiness level, size, etc. Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
8

Following this mapping of proposals against categories, a suitable portfolio of proposals will be
selected by the evaluation committee by applying portfolio considerations to propose for funding a
coherent set of projects that will achieve the expected out comes and impacts of the Challenge and
maximise their impact.

Categories

All proposals of which the assessment in Step 1 of the evaluation process resulted in a score above the
threshold will be mapped to the following four categories (with the clinical area added as an additional
category):
Category 1: Type of Cancer considered by a proposal.
As defined by WP, each proposal should focus on one (and only one) of the following diseases: breast
cancer, cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, brain cancer, stomach cancer or
colorectal cancer.

Category 2: Type of clinical area covered with possible values:
i. Predictive Diagnosis.
ii. Personalized Treatment Selection.
Category 3: Technology area
Which technological approach is used in the proposal. The three possible values are:
i. GenAI-based tools (or other advanced AI technologies) for Integrating Multidimensional
Multimodal Health Data
ii. Medical Data Augmentation
iii. Medical Knowledge Representation and Integration.

Category 4: Access to Infrastructure, data and ecosystem integration
What are the research infrastructures and clinical facilities that the proposal aims to use, which large
datasets do they have access to, and what are their partnerships with hospitals or research institutions
for clinical validation.


Examples:
Access to infrastructure and data:
- Connection to Existing European Research and Clinical Infrastructures , e.g . Testing and
Experimentation Facilities (TEFs), Euro-BioImaging, Cancer Image Europe platform, the future
UNCAN.eu platform, etc.
- National Cancer/Screening Registries and Open Databases.
Ecosystem Integration
- Collaboration with Leading Clinical Institutions focused on oncology.
- Where possible, seek complementarity and synergies with other activities already funded or
in the funding pipeline in the framework of the Health cluster of Horizon Europe or the Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
9

Innovative Health Initiative Joint Undertaking seek complementarity and synergies with the
following actions implemented and other activities already funded or in the funding pipeline
in the framework of the Health cluster of Horizon Europe.

Portfolio considerations
The process of building a balanced and impactful project portfolio will adhere to the following
principles:
1. Diverse Cancer Representation
Ensure that the portfolio covers a broad spectrum of cancers, allowing for a diverse impact across
different patient populations. This will be done by selecting one project per cancer type (breast cancer,
cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, brain cancer, stomach cancer or
colorectal cancer), if possible, when following the selection procedure and ranking system.
2.   Clinical and technological areas
While we require that each proposal considers at least one of the three technological areas and at
least one of t he two clinical areas, pro posals that tackle as many as possible  technological areas —
tools for integrating multidimensional multimodal health data, medical data augmentation, and
medical knowledge representation and integration —and both clinical areas (diagnosis and therapy)
will be  considered to constitute the core of the portfolio to be built . By addressing all relevant
technological and clinical areas within your proposal, rather than focusing on just a subset, you will
enhance the overall impact and alignment with the Challenge goals. This comprehensive approach can
provide more robust outcomes and foster greater innovation.

3. Diversity with respect to Access to Infrastructure, Data, and Ecosystem Integration
Ensure diversity in the use of infrastructures, databases, and ecosystems, e.g. , to have a diverse
geographical coverage in the projects.
It is also suggested that in your proposal you make a self -assessment of how your proposals maps to
the four categories by adding the following table. The evaluation team will confirm or update this and
use it only in the step 2 of the evaluation.

Category Value
Type of Cancer
Clinical Area
Technological area
Access to Infrastructure, Data ,
and Ecosystem integration

 Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
10

The selection process will be structured as follows. We start from the highest-ranked projects. For all
projects with the same cancer type, the proposal with the highest score that tackle as many as possible
technological and clinical areas , and a proper  alignment with the access to infrastructure , data and
ecosystem integration principle will be selected.
In principle it is the aim to represent all cancer types in the portfolio . However, if for a certain cancer
the proposals do not convincingly fit the technology and infrastructure principle, an already
represented cancer types, ensuring diverse clinical areas and/or technologies and  complementary
infrastructure access, might be selected.
Consequently, this means that the projects selected for funding after the second step maydiffer from
the ranking list established from the first step (score-based ranking after assessment of each proposal
separately).
4 Implementation of the Challenge portfolio

Once funded, projects will be expected and obliged to work collectively during the implementation of
their projects under the guidance of an EIC Programme Manager. This section summarises some of the
key aspects of this pro-active management which applicants should take into account in preparing their
proposals.

Proposal preparation and Grant negotiations

Applicants may be requested to make amendments to their proposed project to take into enhance the
portfolio. Such changes may for instance include additional tasks to undertake common/joint activities
(workshops, data exchanges, joint research, etc) with other projects in the portfolio.

Based on first experience, it is proposed to foresee in your proposal a dedicated work  package for
portfolio activities and to allocate at least 10 person-months (see below for the purpose and examples
of such activities).

If you fail to do this during proposal time, your proposal will not be scored lower during the evaluation,
but in case your proposal is selected for grant agreement preparation, you will be requested to add
the portfolio work package to your grant agreement. Please be aware that in that case the maximum
grant you receive will not change, and you will need to find the resources for portfolio activities within
the foreseen project budget.


Portfolio activities

The aims of the portfolio activities are:

1. Enhancing the development potential of each individual project, as a result of its active
participation in the portfolio activities: ensuring that portfolio members  can access a much
higher number of relevant partnerships. Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
11

2. Enhancing the commercialisation potential of each individual project, as a result of its active
participation in the portfolio activities: ensuring that portfolio members, can access the right
industry partners to explore key partnerships.
To accomplish the above the Programme Manager will guide the projects to  develop and agree on a
strategic plan for the portfolio.
Portfolio Strategic Plan

Following the selection of a proposals to be funded under the Challenge, the Programme Manager will
work together with the consortia of the selected proposals to develop a common strategic plan for the
Challenge. This plan will integrate the activities and milestones of the individual projects into a shared
set of specific objectives and activities across and beyond the projects. It serves as a common basis for
the project implementation - including possible adjustments, reorientations, or additional support to
projects. It will be updated considering emerging results o r issues during the implementation. The
objectives can be revised, for instance based on projects’ unexpected achievements, new technology
trends, external inputs (other projects, new calls…).

In particular, the Challenge strategic plan will include activities on the transition to innovation and
commercialisation, and to stimulate business opportunities. These activities may be reinforced during
the implementation with additional funding and expertise through pro -active management.  Non-
exhaustive examples of activities towards the above-mentioned aims are:

Technology:
• Compare Agents: Evaluate the use of a combination of agents in cases of multiple cancers to
identify synergies and improve outcomes.
• Generate a Common Database: Develop a shared database of synthetically generated images
to be used by projects addressing the same type of cancer for algorithm development.
• Benchmarking: Establish agents benchmarking to enhance diagnosis and personalized
treatment selection across projects addressing the same type of cancer.
Regulatory:
• Standardized Methods and Frameworks: Develop standardized methods and frameworks for
evaluating AI models in compliance with AI Act and Medical Device Regulation (MDR).
Ethics
• Discussing the relevant for the Challenge ethics issues, especially when within the portfolio
there are projects subject to ethics reviews.
• Perform activities that support, inform, and participate in discussions around the process of
putting forward relevant ethical principles and discussing the appropriate approaches for
compliance.
Clinical:
• Innovative Clinical Pathways: Define and implement innovative clinical pathways in oncology,
leveraging the diverse technologies and approaches from each project. Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
12

• External Validation: Validate the developed agents externally within the clinical
premises/infrastructures of other projects in the portfolio to ensure robustness and
generalizability.

Innovation:
• Considerations on early-stage commercialisation strategies: directly address the need to move
from research to market, including IP management, market analysis, regulatory pathways,
business model development, funding strategies, product development, and go -to-market
strategies.
• Capacity Building and Training: Establish training programs for project teams to enhance their
skills in emerging technologies, regulatory compliance, patenting and commercialization
strategies.

Dissemination and Communication:
• Stakeholder Engagement and Communication: Organize regular workshops with key
stakeholders (e.g., clinicians, patients, industry partners) to gather feedback and ensure
alignment with clinical needs and market demands. Establish a board with industry experts to
provide guidance on commercialization strategies.


The key operational points of this strategic plan include:
- Development of a Strategic Plan: Create and publish a detailed strategic plan that outlines the
specific objectives, activities, and milestones to be achieved over the project’s duration
through the portfolio. Ensure that the strategic plan integrates activities of the individual
proposals into a coherent and unified way. This should be published about 1 year after the
creation of the portfolio.
- Annual Reporting: Generate an annual report that details the progress made with respect to
the strategic plan by the portfolio group, starting from year 2 of the portfolio creation. These
reports will highlight achievements, challenges, and any necessary adjustments to the plan.
- Accountability: Each proposal team is responsible for contributing to the strategic plan  and
the annual reports, providing updates on their progress and any issues encountered.
- Collaboration and Guidance: Under the guidance of the Program me Manager, the different
proposals are expected to work and collaborate effectively on the commonly defined strategic
plan objectives and activities. The Programme Manager will provide oversight and support to
ensure that all projects remain aligned with the strategic plan. While the Programme Manager
provides guidance, each project team must take responsibility and initiative for their
respective tasks. Collaboration between teams is essential to achieve the common goals of the
Challenge.
- Strategic Plan Updates: The strategic plan will be a living document, updated annually if
needed based on emerging results, new technology trends, and external inputs such as new
projects or calls for proposals. The objectives and activities outlined in the strategic plan can Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
13

be revised based on unexpected achievements, new opportunities, and insights gained during
implementation.

An example of timeline and operating mechanism is given below:

Stage Activity Participants Frequency Purpose/Outcome Timeline
1. Initial
Kickoff
Kickoff
Meeting
All Participants Year 1 only Identify key
common activities,
draft strategic plan,
establish working
groups, align goals
Within 2-3
months
after grant
agreement
is signed
for all
projects
2. Activity
Engagement
Activity
Group
Formation
Participants based
on
interest/expertise
As needed
after
kickoff
Form groups for
specific activities
Year 1
3. Regular
Follow-up
Progress
Meetings (by
Activity)
Activity Groups,
(Program
Manager)
Bi-
Monthly
Discuss progress,
address challenges,
plan next steps
 Year 1 – Q4
to end of
portfolio
activities
4. Cross -
Activity Sync
Coordination
Meetings
Activity Group
Leaders, Program
Manager
Quarterly Ensure alignment
across activities,
share updates
 Year 1 -Q4
to end of
portfolio
activities
5. Annual
Review
Annual
Review and
Planning
Meeting
All Participants Annually Review yearly
progress, adjust
strategic plan, set
next year’s goals
 Q1 of
every year
6. Final
Review
Final Review
Meeting
All Participants End of
Year 4
Present outcomes,
lessons learned,
discuss
sustainability
End of
portfolio
activities


The exchange of information for the purpose of EIC portfolio activities will fall under the conditions
and non-disclosure obligations as specified in the EIC Work Programme 2025 (Annex 6, section 2).
Tools though which projects can receive additional support

Projects in the portfolio may be offered additional support, either individually or collectively, in order
to reinforce portfolio activities or explore the transition to innovation. Such additional support
includes:
Projects in the portfolio may be offered additional support, either individually or collectively, in order
to reinforce portfolio activities or explore the transition to innovation. Such additional support
includes:
- Booster grants of up to €50k (see Annex 5 of the EIC Work Programme).
- Access to additional EIC Business Acceleration Services (see
https://eic.ec.europa.eu/eic-funding-opportunities/business-acceleration-services_en) Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
14

- Access to the Fast Track to the EIC Accelerator, which would follow a project review (see Annex
3 of the EIC Work Programme).
- The possibility to apply for EIC Transition if your Pathfinder project resulted in an experimental
proof of concept (TRL 3), or a technology validated in the lab (TRL 4)
- Access to the EIC Market Place, once operational, to connect with innovators, investors and
other selected partners.
- Interactions with relevant projects and initiatives outside the portfolio, including other EU
funding initiatives as well as those supported by national, regional or other international
bodies.


5. Annex 1: Template workpackage portfolio activities

WPX PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
Start Month 1, End Month (full project duration)
Objectives
Explore synergies and collaborations among the projects of the portfolio, to maximize the achievement
of the scientific results, the exploitation potentials, the outreach opportunities with key stakeholders,
the identification and overcoming of major barriers to introduce the innovation to the market ….
Specific objectives:
• Contribute to the elaboration of the strategic plan of portfolio and sub -portfolio activities,
which is composed by a list of the specific techno-scientific joint collaborations between two
or more portfolio projects, with the respective timeline and expected achievements. Potential
synergies identified by a comprehensive in -depth analysis of shared components and
complementarities amongst the portfolio members is expected to unlock additional value for
each portfolio member.
• Developing a common understanding within the portfolio members of the existing and
developing regulatory environment) in view of the future implementation of the technologies
that are developed by the portfolio members. By identifying regulatory barriers for innovation,
the portfolio of projects can jointly contribute to potential improvements and further
development of  the regulatory framework.  Through common communication activities
addressed at policy makers and other relevant stakeholders such as dissemination at scientific
conferences or trade -fairs, social acceptance for proposed solutions can be increased, and
regulatory barriers for innovation can be highlighted.
• Sharing life cycle analysis and life cycle thinking and developing novel/common metrics or
ways of benchmarking  the potential environmental impact associated with each solution is
expected to contribute to the acceptance and future implementation of the technologies
developed by the portfolio members.
• Define common scenarios and strategies for commercialization and exploitation. Identify key
stakeholders such as relevant end -users, investors, supply -chain actors. Effectively
communicate key outcomes of the research work of the portfolio members collectively and/or
as individual project to early stage private and corporate investors focused on the same field
to attract early feedback. Exchanging such techno -economic insights an d commercialization
scenarios with other portfolio members is expected to have more impact than individual
projects can achieve and may also trigger new partnership(s). Also, collective understanding
of IP strategies and IP management is expected to add portfolio value to each project. Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
15

Description
Task X.1: Portfolio management and governance  This task will require regular meetings and
exchanges among the portfolio projects, to identify collaborations on specific technical aspects and
exchange of information, best practices, strategies, etc.. A steering committee where each project is
represented will be set up and steered by the Programme Manager. It will include the kick off meeting
and the annual portfolio meeting in presence, and additional regular online meetings. 4 WGs will be
set up to organiz e and implement activities in: WG1: Technological synergies; WG2: Regulatory
environment, outreach events and awareness practices; WG3: LCA activities and WG4:
Commercialization, exploitation, IP protection. Each consortium will nominate a representative f or
each WG. A chair will be nominated from among them. The chair will be responsible to prepare
meeting agendas, links to the meeting and minutes of the meetings. WG Meetings are expected to be
online and to be scheduled approximately every 3 months. The e xchange of information for the
purpose of EIC portfolio activities will fall under the conditions and non -disclosure obligations as
specified in the EIC Work Programme 2023 (Annex 6, section 2.2).

Task X.2: Portfolio actions to foster collaboration towards innovation.  This task will create
opportunities to nurture innovations arising from portfolio collaboration, for example: common
understanding of license agreements, EIC Business Acceleration Services, access to coaching and
mentoring, European IP Helpdesk services, access to additional funding opportunities such as the EIC
Booster grant. To stimulate innovation opportunities, the projects shall be involved in actions aimed
at strengthening the EU research community. Therefore, this task can also include: the mapping and
categorization of all the stakeholders and potential establishment of key partnership(s), the sharing of
best practices, the exchange of researchers, access to research facilities, etc.
Task X.3: Implementation of portfolio dissemination and communication activities Design and
participate in outreach events (e.g., stakeholder matchmaking, industry trade fairs) at the portfolio
level to facilitate connection with stakeholders and to showcase the technologies under
development. Meetings could be restricted to portfolio beneficiaries (e.g., to discuss the progress of
the portfolio as a whole) or could involve external participants (e.g., to facilitate successful completion
of shared objective s by interaction with regulatory entities). Early -on common and continuous
engagement with strategic AEC sector stakeholders to raise awareness of the possibility to reduce
emissions by reducing and changing traditional build materials with computational d esign and
digitalized fabrication is foreseen.
Task X.4: Techno -economic benchmark and comparative assessment  Compare LCA practices and
metrics of the different projects and analyse the performance of the proposed solution with the other
portfolio technologies using common agreed metrics and KPI and produce a portfolio report on
competitiveness, business potentia ls in different market segments and key barriers towards
innovation of the portfolio technologies in comparison to benchmark.
Task X.5: Implementation of portfolio protection and exploitation activities Mapping, landscaping,
categorization, and analysis of patents and include if needed the establishment of key partnership.
Early on and continuous engagement with strategic partners and stakeholders (e.g., investors and
corporations) with the aim to catalys e potential R&D opportunities and to commonly tackle
investment barriers. Design and participate in events at the portfolio level to facilitate connection with
stakeholders or fun draising with private stakeholders (e.g., corporates or financial
investors). Exchange of the market research analysis results in between the portfolio projects. 
Task X.6: Portfolio Strategic plan and other common documents: Elaboration of the portfolio strategic
plan under the guidance of the Programme Manager  and updated on a yearly basis. It will contain
details of the techno-scientific collaborations and synergies of the portfolio projects (could be only one
or more projects). It contains the actions already carried out, but also an overview of upcoming actions
in the form of a roadmap. It will specify the common documents that the projects will deliver because
of the other tasks specified in this work -package. Individual projects do not need to add these
documents as a deliverable, they explain the contribution that they made to this report in their Challenge Guide – Generative-AI based Agents to Revolutionize
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer
16

corresponding annual deliverable “Report on portfolio activities”. A public version of the strategic plan
will be published on the EIC website at year 1 and updated annually afterwards.

Deliverable X.1: Contribution to the Portfolio Strategic Plan (single deliverable)
This deliverable is the initial project’s contribution to the Portfolio Strategic Plan. It will be integrated
with the other projects’ contributions in the overall Portfolio Strategic Plan under the guidance of the
EIC Programme Manager.
Type: R: Document, report (excluding the periodic and final reports)
Dissemination level:  SEN – Sensitive, limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement
Due date:  month 6.

Deliverable X.2.i: Report on portfolio activities (i=number of each implementation year. One
deliverable per year; 3 deliverables for a 36 -months project and 4 deliverables for a 48 -months
project)
The report will present the portfolio activities that have been carried out in each reporting period and
contain relevant material (e.g., PowerPoint presentations, minutes of meetings, etc.). It also explains
how the portfolio activities and the EIC proact ive project management approach contribute to the
achievement of the project objectives and help the transition to market.
Type: R: Document, report (excluding the periodic and final reports)
Dissemination level:  SEN – Sensitive, limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement
Due date:  The report on portfolio activities will be submitted every 12 months.

Final considerations
• Effort to be allocated to this work package: 10 p.m.

• In Month 1 the project should set up an operational internal governance to cover the following
three main roles (with at least two distinct persons that are not necessarily from the coordinator)
and with responsibilities in the four aforementioned WGs under Task X.1:
1) Portfolio manager, in charge of:
• Coordination of the portfolio activities (including the writing of the task’s reports and
deliverables).
• Identification and establishment of synergies, shared components and collaboration
opportunities with one or more projects in the portfolio.
• Assessment of the competitiveness of the proposed technologies for different applications.
• Participation in data collection for monitoring the technology development.

2) Innovation manager, in charge of:
• Elaboration of the exploitation strategies and set -up of the project exploitation plan
(including the IPR strategy).
• Identification of market needs, coordination of market analysis, identification of business
opportunities and fundraising options.
• Assessment of the key stakeholders, analysis of the value chain.

3) Communication manager with the following roles and tasks:
• Defines the portfolio communication strategy.
• Implements the portfolio communication and dissemination activities.
• Manages a common database for events and a shared database of scientific instruments.