This project has received funding from the European Union’s DG RTD - Horizon Europe
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 101046298
www.access2eic.eu
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE
EIC PATHFINDER OPEN
2024This project has received funding from the European Union’s DG RTD
- Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under Grant
Agreement No 101046298
Copyright
© Access2EIC
First edition • January 2024
This guide is available online: https://access2eic.eu/
Reuse is allowed, provided appropriate credit is given
AUTHORS
Nicole Jansen & Michaela Holz, DLR Project Management Agency, Germany
Tsvetelina Yorgova, GIS-Transfer Center Foundation, Bulgaria
Elsa Urquizar, Ministère de l’Enseignement supérieur et de la Recherche, France
Valentina Fioroni & Alessia Rotolo, APRE – Agenzia per la Promozione della Ricerca Europea,Italy
Ricardo Carvalho, ANI - Agência Nacional de Inovação, Portugal
Edina Nemeth, NKFIH - National Research Development and Innovation Office, Hungary
DISCLAIMER
This report was produced within the framework of Access2EIC, the official network of Horizon
Europe National Contact Points (NCPs) for the European Innovation Council (EIC) and European
Innovation Ecosystems (EIE). Access2EIC’s main objective is to provide support and specialised
services to the network of EIC and EIE NCPs. While every effort has been made to ensure that the
information contained in this document is accurate and up to date, Access2EIC does not assume
any liability or responsibility for the completeness, accuracy, or usefulness of the information
included in this document. Information is provided strictly “as is”.
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 20243
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Introduction and Background
The ‘Annotated proposal template EIC Pathfinder Open’ is a guide created in order to help applicants better
understand the requirements of the template and write better applications. The annotated template is
provided for information only, and reflects solely the view of the authors.
This guide has been written as part of the Access2EICs project, a Coordination and Support Action funded
by the European Commission, with the goal of empowering the network of Europe National Contact Points
(NCPs) of the EIC European Innovation Council.
The authors of this guide are EIC European Innovation Council NCPs. Their recommendations appear in the
document as “Expert recommendations”.
The structure of this document mirrors that of the proposal template for the EIC Pathfinder Open 2024.
This guide is limited to annotations to the templates of the EIC Pathfinder Open 2024. For a more general
overview of how the Horizon Europe grants work, see the Online Manual provided by the European
Commission.
A comprehensive list of all Horizon Europe reference documents (including legislation, work
programme and templates) can be found on the Reference documents page of the Participant Portal.
If you need help, you can also contact the Horizon Europe National Contact Points of your country.
The document has been structured to guide applicants on how to best present information answering the
evaluation criteria of (1) Excellence, (2) Impact and (3) Quality and efficiency of the implementation .
The guide should be useful for anyone who wants to submit an EIC Pathfinder Open 2024 proposal.
AIM AND CONTENT
The European Innovation Council aims to identify and support breakthrough technologies and game
changing innovations with the potential to scale up internationally and become market leaders.
Within this scheme, the overall objective of the EIC Pathfinder instrument is to develop the scientific
basis to underpin breakthrough technologies. It provides support for the earliest stages of scientific,
technological or deep-tech research and development. Pathfinder projects aim to build on new,
cutting-edge directions in science and technology to disrupt a field and a market or create new
opportunities by realising innovative technological solutions.
The overall aim of this annotated template is to provide applicants with tools and tips on how
to draft a proposal with a better chance of winning the EIC Pathfinder. The examples used in the
document are based, among others, on successful proposals that EIC NCPs have previously identified
and consulted, and are generalized to become more universal.
The Expert recommendations and the Examples provided in the document are intended to help
applicants by clarifying certain relevant points requested in the proposal template. These directives
are not taken from a running funded project. Also, they should not be followed blindly, but seen as
illustrations of the expert recommendations. They are meant to give an idea of the elements that
should be covered, but these elements should be described in greater detail in the proposal itself.
4
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
As explained above, the three main criteria used to evaluate the innovative aspects of a project
proposal for Horizon Europe are:
EXCELLENCE
This section shall
demonstrate your long-term
vision and science-towards-
technology breakthrough
and how the high-risk/high-
potential innovation goes
beyond the state of the art
in its field, in comparison
to existing and competing
solutions. In addition, you
have to prove how relevant
your interdisciplinary
approach is to achieve the
proposed breakthrough.
60%
IMPACT
This section assesses the
positive effects that your
technology will have to
economy, environment and
society. It will also evaluate
the innovation potential.
20%
QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY
OF THE IMPLEMENTATION
This section must address
your work plan (work
packages, deliverables,
milestones, timeline etc.) and
the allocation of resources of
all partners. You must prove
that all consortium members
have the expertise to perform
the project tasks.
20%
5
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
       EIC PATHFINDER OPEN
       Project proposal - Technical description (Part B)
Part B - GENERAL TIPS
The ‘Annotated proposal template EIC Pathfinder Open’ is a guide created in order to help applicants better
understand the requirements of the template and write better applications. The annotated template is
provided for information only, and reflects solely the view of the authors.
• European dimension: make sure to clearly show how your proposal is relevant to Europe
• Form and content: Bear in mind that form matters: Take the time to review and polish the language.
You can change the appearance of the proposal, as long as you maintain the font size, margins and
numbering of chapters and sections. DO NOT REDUCE FONT SIZE! Increase the spacing between letters
makes the proposal easier to read and seem less dense.
• Visuals: a picture is worth a thousand words. Use pictures and graphics instead of lengthy textual
explanations, where possible and where they increase the comprehension.
• Printability: Consider that some evaluators print out the proposals. Make sure pictures and graphics
work in black and white, too.
• Using links: you can include links to web-pages that demonstrate different aspects of the project;
however, this isn’t a gateway to buy additional space for text. The proposal must have all the information
needed, while the links are ‘bonuses’. Do not assume the evaluator will click these links.
• As many eyes as possible : before submitting, let other people read your proposal and comment. Try
to choose people who are not from your field, to make sure the proposal can be easily understood by
an “interested layman”.
• Completeness: do not forget to answer every single question, even if you think you don’t really
understand what the template means and/or do not think that the particular question is important.
• For re-submissions: evaluators do not know that you re-submitted unless you mention it. They are
instructed to ignore any reference to previous submissions. Nonetheless, if you choose to mention that
this is a re-submission, make sure to write what were the weak spots of the last submission and what
you did in order to improve it. In any case, evaluators will not receive a copy of the first submission or
the results of the previous evaluation.
You are welcome to contact your National Contact Point
with any questions.
6
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
EIC PATHFINDER OPEN
Project proposal - Technical description (Part B)
Version 5
11 December 2023
The electronic submission system is an online wizard that guides
you step-by-step through the preparation of your proposal. The
submission process consists of 6 steps:
Step 1: Logging in the Portal.
Step 2: Select the call, topic and type of action in the Portal.
Step 3: Create a draft proposal: Title, acronym, summary, main
organisation and contact details.
Step 4: Manage your parties and contact details: add your partner
organisations and contact details.
Step 5: Edit and complete web forms for proposal part A and upload
proposal part B.
Step 6: Submit the proposal.
Proposal template Part B: technical description
The structure of this template must be followed when preparing
your proposal. It has been designed to ensure that the important
aspects of your planned work are presented in a way that will
enable the experts to make an effective assessment against the
evaluation criteria. Sections 1, 2 and 3 each correspond to an
evaluation criterion.
Please be aware that proposals will be evaluated as they were
submitted, rather than on their potential if certain changes were to
be made. This means that only proposals that successfully address
all the required aspects will have a chance of being funded. There
will be no possibility for significant changes to content, budget and
consortium composition during grant preparation.
Page limit: The sections 1, 2 and 3, together, should not be longer
than 20 pages. All tables, figures, references and any other element
pertaining to these sections must be included as an integral part of
these sections and are thus counted against this page limit.
The page limit will be applied automatically. At the end of this
document you can see the structure of the actual proposal that
you need to submit, please remove all instruction pages that are
watermarked.
If you attempt to upload a proposal longer than the specified
limit before the deadline, you will receive an automatic warning
and will be advised to shorten and re-upload the proposal. After
the deadline, excess pages (in over-long proposals/applications)
will be automatically made invisible, and will not be taken into
consideration by the experts. The proposal is a self-contained
Follow the formatting instructions
carefully, but be creative. Work
with bolding or underlining, insert
emphasising illustrations in order
to help the evaluator to follow your
argumentation.
Please bear in mind that some
evaluators review proposals in
printed form. Coloured sections and
illustrations must also be clearly
legible in a black and white A4
printout.
Include a header or footer with your
short title and your descriptive long 7
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
document. Experts will be instructed to ignore hyperlinks to
information that is specifically designed to expand the proposal,
thus circumventing the page limit.
Please, do not consider the page limit as a target! It is in your
interest to keep your text as concise as possible, since experts
rarely view unnecessarily long proposals in a positive light.
The following formatting conditions apply.
The reference font for the body text of proposals is Times New
Roman (Windows platforms), Times/Times New Roman (Apple
platforms) or Nimbus Roman No. 9 L (Linux distributions).
The use of a different font for the body text is not advised and is
subject to the cumulative conditions that the font is legible and
that its use does not significantly shorten the representation of the
proposal in number of pages compared to using the reference font
(for example with a view to bypass the page limit).
The minimum font size allowed is 11 points. Standard character
spacing and a minimum of single line spacing is to be used. This
applies to the body text, including text in tables.
Text elements other than the body text, such as headers, foot/end
notes, captions, formula’s, may deviate, but must be legible.
The page size is A4, and all margins (top, bottom, left, right) should
be at least 15 mm (not including any footers or headers).
This document is tagged. Be careful not to delete the tags; they
are needed for processing.
title. This way, the evaluator always
knows which proposal she or he is
currently working on.
Do not delete the tags included right
after each subtopic’s title, even adding
your additional subtopics.
References can be either included in
the document’s footnote or on the final
pages of the document.
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“Except from clinical studies annexes
when relevant, the applicants cannot
upload other documents than the
20-page proposal. If they believe it
is necessary, applicants must include
support letters or other documents
into the 20 pages of part B. We also
strongly advise against including them
in the Annex foreseen for clinical studies
as evaluators will be instructed to
disregard them.”
Definition
Critical risk: Acritical risk is a plausible event or issue that could
have a high adverse impact on the ability of the project to achieve
its objectives.
Level of likelihood to occur (Low/medium/high): The likelihood is
the estimated probability that the risk will materialise even after
taking account of the mitigating measures put in place.
Level of severity (Low/medium/high): The relative seriousness of
the risk and the significance of its effect.
Deliverable: A report that is sent to the Commission or Agency
providing information to ensure effective monitoring of the project.
There are different types of deliverables (e.g. a report on specific
activities or results, data management plans, ethics or security
requirements).
Impacts: Wider longterm effects on society (including the
environment), the economy and science, enabled by the outcomes
of R&I investments (long term). It refers to the specific contribution
of the project to the work programme expected impacts described
in the destination. Impacts generally occur some time after the
end of the project.
Example: The deployment of the advanced forecasting system
enables each airport to increase maximum passenger capacity by
Any type of critical risk should be
included, not only the technical
risks but also the management and
financial risks, among others. Also
include a mitigation strategy. 8
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
15% and passenger average throughput by 10%, leading to a 28%
reduction in infrastructure expansion costs.
Milestone: Control points in the project that help to chart progress.
Milestones may correspond to the achievement of a key result,
allowing the next phase of the work to begin. They may also be
needed at intermediary points so that, if problems have arisen,
corrective measures can be taken. A milestone may be a critical
decision point in the project where, for example, the consortium
must decide which of several technologies to adopt for further
development. The achievement of a milestone should be verifiable.
Objectives: The goals of the work performed within the project, in
terms of its research and innovation content. This will be translated
into the project’s results. These may range from tackling specific
research questions, demonstrating the feasibility of an innovation,
sharing knowledge among stakeholders on specific issues. The
nature of the objectives will depend on the type of action, and the
scope of the topic.
Outcomes: The expected effects, over the medium term, of
projects supported under a given topic.  The results of a project
should contribute to these outcomes, fostered in particular by the
dissemination and exploitation measures. This may include the
uptake, diffusion, deployment, and/or use of the project’s results
by direct target groups. Outcomes generally occur during or shortly
after the end of the project.
Example: 9 European airports adopt the advanced forecasting
system demonstrated during the project.
Pathway to impact: Logical steps towards the achievement of the
expected impacts of the project over time, in particular beyond
the duration of a project. A pathway begins with the projects’
results, to their dissemination, exploitation and communication,
contributing to the expected outcomes in the work programme
topic, and ultimately to the wider scientific, economic and societal
impacts of the work programme destination.
Research output: Results generated by the action to which access
can be given in the form of scientific publications, data or other
engineered outcomes and processes such as software, algorithms,
protocols and electronic notebooks.
Results: What is generated during the project implementation.
This may include, for example, know-how, innovative solutions,
algorithms, proof of feasibility, new business models, policy
recommendations, guidelines, prototypes, demonstrators,
databases and datasets, trained researchers, new infrastructures,
networks, etc. Most project results (inventions, scientific works,
etc.) are ‘Intellectual Property’, which may, if appropriate, be
protected by formal ‘Intellectual Property Rights’.
Example: Successful large-scale demonstrator: trial with 3 airports
of an advanced forecasting system for proactive airport passenger
flow management.9
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Technology Readiness Level: See EIC Work Programme under
Glossary section.
Title of the proposal
1.EXCELLENCE
Excellence – aspects to be taken into account. (Evaluation criteria)
Long-term vision: How convincing is the vision of a radically new
technology towards which the project would contribute in the long
term?
Science-towards-technology breakthrough : How concrete, novel
and ambitious is the proposed science-towards-technology
breakthrough with respect to the state-of-the-art?
What advancement does it provide towards realising the envisioned
technology?
Objectives: How concrete and plausible are the proposed
objectives? To what extent is the high-risk/high-gain research
approach appropriate for achieving them? How sound is the
proposed methodology, including the underlying concepts, models,
assumptions, alternative directions and options, appropriate
consideration of the gender dimension in research content, and
the quality of open science practices?
Interdisciplinarity: How relevant is the interdisciplinary approach
from traditionally distant disciplines for achieving the proposed
breakthrough?
Make a strong entrance. Explain your
idea, technology and methodology
in a short paragraph. Show your
motivation and advertise your project
in order to get the evaluator hooked
on for your idea.
Don’t stick to a too modest wording,
dare to use superlatives and
promotional language while making a
scientifically correct presentation.
Here you are expected to describe
your new technology and cutting-edge
innovation. Why is it an ambitious
idea and truly new compared to what
is known? What is you compelling
plan? How is it achievable?
• New technology? Cutting-edge
innovation?
• Ambitious idea? Truly new
compared to what is known?
• Compelling plan? Achievable?
• Interdisciplinary?
10
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
1.1 Long-term vision
Describe your vision of the radically new technology, towards which
the project would contribute in the long term.
1.2 Science-towards-technology breakthrough
Describe in concrete terms the science-towards-technology
breakthrough of the project.
Describe the relevant state-of-the-art and discuss the novelty and
ambition of the proposed breakthrough with respect to it.
Describe the contribution of the science-towards-technology
breakthrough to the realization of the envisioned technology.
Get to the point quickly. Don’t keep
your evaluator waiting too long for
the news. It should be clear to the
reviewer in the first paragraph what
you intend to do in your project.
Don’t start with lengthy background
information.
Try to present the long-term vision
of the future technology itself, that
you already roughly presented in
the introduction part at the very
beginning. This will allow to “capture”
the attention of the evaluator.
• Long-term vision of a science-
enabled technology should be
clear as much as possible ( and
concrete).
• This vision should match with the
ambition that stands behind the
proposed science-to-technology
breakthrough.
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“The long-term vision of the future
technology itself should be presented
in Excellence at the very beginning,
while innovation-related aspects clearly
belong in section 2. Here you should
focus on the long-term impact and on
the innovation potential of the future
technology.”
Try to “demostrate” that the main
ideas of the envisioned future
technology are achievable.
Try to contextualize the “new
technology”, providing information
on what is the new insight/approach/
strategy that may lead to a new
technological paradigm.
11
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
1.3 Objectives
Describe the objectives of your proposed work. Are they concrete
and plausible, measurable and verifiable? Are they realistically
achievable within the duration of the project?
Explain the appropriateness of the high-risk research approach for
achieving the high gain objectives set in your project.
Describe and explain the overall methodology, including the
concepts, models and assumptions that underpin your work.
Explain its suitability to deal with the considerable scientific and
technological uncertainties of the project’s objectives and how
appropriate it is to enable alternative directions and options. Refer
to any important challenges you may have identified in the chosen
methodology and how you intend to overcome them.
This section should be presented as a narrative. The detailed tasks
and work packages, and the risks and the corresponding mitigation
plan are described below under ‘Implementation’.
Where relevant, include how the project methodology complies
with the ‘ do no significant harm ’ principle as per Article 17 of
Regulation (EU) No 2020/852on the establishment of a framework to
facilitate sustainable investment (i.e. the so-called ‘EU Taxonomy
Regulation’). This means that the methodology is designed in a
way it is not significantly harming any of the six environmental
objectives of the EU Taxonomy Regulation.
If you plan to use, develop and/or deploy artificial intelligence
(AI) based systems and/or techniques you must demonstrate their
technical robustness. AI-based systems or techniques should be, or
be developed to become:
• technically robust, accurate and reproducible, and able to
deal with and inform about possible failures, inaccuracies and
errors, proportionate to the assessed risk they pose
• socially robust, in that they duly consider the context and
environment in which they operate
• reliable and function as intended, minimizing unintentional
and unexpected harm, preventing unacceptable harm and
safeguarding the physical and mental integrity of humans
• able to provide a suitable explanation of their decision-making
processes, whenever they can have a significant impact on
people’s lives.
Provide concrete specific, measurable,
attainable, relevant and time-bound
(SMART) objectives (avoiding general
and multiple objectives). Alternatively,
propose the main objectives and the
sub objectives.
The EIC Pathfinder supports high risk/
high gain research. It is therefore
important to present the risks
realistically.
12
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Describe how the gender dimension  (i.e. sex and/or gender
analysis) is taken into account in the project’s research and
innovation content. If you do not consider such a gender dimension
to be relevant in your project, please provide a justification.
• Note: This section is mandatory except for topics which have
been identified in the workprogramme as not requiring the
integration of the gender dimension into R&I content.
• Remember that this question relates to the content of the
planned research and innovation activities, and not to gender
balance in the teams in charge of carrying out the project.
• Sex and gender analysis refers to biological characteristics and
social/cultural factors respectively. For guidance on methods
of sex / gender analysis and the issues to be taken into account,
please refer to https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/gendered-
innovations-2-2020-nov-24_en
Applicants must provide information
on how they intend to integrate the
gender dimension into the project.
The gender dimension refers to
technical and scientific aspects of the
project and not to the composition of
the consortium and the persons that
will work for the project.
The gender dimension refers to the
integration of considerations of sex
and/or gender analysis through the
whole R&I process, from the setting
of research priorities through defining
concepts, formulating research
questions, developing methodologies,
gathering and analysing sex/gender
disaggregated data, to evaluating and
reporting results and transferring
them to markets into products and
innovations which will benefit all
citizens and promote gender equality.
Integrating sex and gender analysis
into R&I content improves the
scientific quality and societal
relevance of the produced knowledge,
technologies and innovation.
If gender aspects are not relevant,
indicate that this has been considered
and and justify why they are not
applicable.
Useful links
• HE Programme Guide  (Chapter 9)
• Gendered innovations 2 - How
inclusive analysis contributes to
13
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Describe how appropriate open science practices are implemented
as an integral part of the proposed methodology. Show how the
choice of practices and their implementation are adapted to the
nature of your work, in a way that will increase the chances of the
project delivering on its objectives. If you believe that none of
these practices are appropriate for your project, please provide a
justification here.
• Open science is an approach based on open cooperative work
and systematic sharing of knowledge and tools as early and
widely as possible in the process. Open science practices
include early and open sharing of research (for example through
preregistration, registered reports, pre-prints, or crowd-
sourcing); research output management; measures to ensure
reproducibility of research outputs; providing open access to
research outputs(such as publications, data, software, models,
algorithms, and workflows); participation in open peer-review;
and involving all relevant knowledge actors including citizens,
civil society and end users in the co-creation of R&I agendas
and contents (such as citizen science).
• Please note that this question does not refer to outreach actions
that may be planned as part of communication, dissemination
and exploitation activities. These aspects should instead be
described below under ‘Impact’.
Research data management and management of other research
outputs: Applicants generating/collecting data and/or other
research outputs (except for publications) during the projectmust
provide a short description on how the data/ research outputs will
be managed in line with the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, Reusable), addressing the following (the description
should be specific to your project):
• Types of data/research outputs  (e.g. experimental,
observational, images, text, numerical) and their estimated
size; if applicable, combination with, and provenance of,
existing data.
• Findability of data/research outputs: Types of persistent and
unique identifiers (e.g. digital object identifiers) and trusted
repositories that will be used.
• Accessibility of data/research outputs: IPR considerations and
timeline for open access (if open access not provided, explain
why); provisions for access to restricted data for verification
purposes.
• Interoperability of data/research outputs: Standards, formats
and vocabularies for data and metadata.
• Reusability of data/research outputs: Licenses for data sharing
and re-use (e.g. Creative Commons, Open Data Commons);
availability of tools/software/models for data generation and
validation / interpretation / re-use.
The proposal must outline the ways
in which data is collected, generated
and/or processed throughout the
lifetime of a research project. It should
briefly cover the type of data/research
outputs, the compliance with the FAIR
data principles (findable, accessible,
interoperable, reusable), and the
way in which data will be stored and
preserved.
Questions to consider when
addressing data management and
other research outputs:
• What types and formats of data
will the project generate or re-
use?
• Will you re-use any existing data
and what will you re-use it for?
State the reasons if re-use of any
existing data has been considered
but discarded.
• What is the purpose of the data
generation or re-use and its
14
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
• Curation and storage/preservation costs : person/team
responsible for data management and quality assurance.
• Proposals selected for funding under Horizon Europe
will need to develop a detailed data management plan
(DMP)for making their data/research outputs findable,
accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR) as a
deliverable by month 6 and revised towards the end of
a project’s lifetime.
• For guidance on open science practices and research
data management, please refer to the relevant section
of the HE Programme Guide on the Funding & Tenders
Portal.
1.4 Interdisciplinarity
• Describe the proposed interdisciplinary approach engaging
contributions from different scientific and technological
disciplines.
• Explain to what extent the combination of disciplines brings
new scientific collaborations and how it contributes to the
achievement of the proposed breakthrough.
relation to the objectives of the
project?
• Which data can be published and
what cannot?
• What is the expected size of the
data that you intend to generate
or re-use?
• What is the origin/provenance
of the data, either generated or
re-used?
• Which data or products of the
project can be shared?
• To whom might your data be
useful (‘data utility’), outside your
project?
Useful link
Data Management Plan Template
• An interdisciplinary approach
involves integrating knowledge
and methodologies from multiple
scientific and technological
disciplines to address complex
problems or explore new areas of
research;
• Technological advancements
often involve the integration
of knowledge from multiple
disciplines. For example,
the development of cutting-
edge technologies such as
nanotechnology, biotechnology,
or artificial intelligence often
requires expertise from physics,
chemistry, biology, and computer
science.
• An interdisciplinary approach is
justified by its capacity to offer
comprehensive insights, foster
innovation, address complex
problems, enhance problem-
solving capabilities, drive
technological advancements, and
recognize the interconnected
nature of knowledge.
15
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“We know that by bringing diverse
areas of research together, often with
different perspectives, terminologies
and methodologies, really new things
can be generated and entirely new
areas of research can be opened
up. That is why the relevance of the
interdisciplinary approach is one of the
elements that are assessed under the
Excellence award criterion.”
2.IMPACT
Impact–aspects to be taken into account (Evaluation criteria)
Long-term impact: To what extent does the envisioned new
technology have potential for generating disruptive innovations in
the future and for creating new markets?  How significant are the
potential transformative positive effects that the envisioned new
technology would have to our economy, environment and society?
Innovation potential: How adequate are the proposed measures
for protection of results and any other exploitation measures to
facilitate future translation of research results into innovations?
How suitable are the proposed measures for involving and
empowering key actors that have the potential to take the lead in
translating research into innovations in the future?
Include scientific impact, technological
impact, societal impact, economic
impact, environmental impact,
collaboration and networking impact,
educational impact etc.
Present a plan for sustaining the
impact of the project beyond its
official duration. This may involve
institutionalizing project outcomes,
securing further funding, or
integrating results into existing
systems.
1) Legal and Regulatory Compliance:
Ensure that proposed measures comply
with relevant laws and regulations
governing intellectual property, data
protection, and any industry-specific
standards;
2) Intellectual Property (IP) Protection:
Patents: Check if the research results
are eligible for patent protection.
Evaluate the completeness and clarity
of the patent application.
Copyrights: Consider whether
copyright protection applies to any
creative works associated with the
research.
3) Risk Assessment:
Identify potential risks and challenges
that may hinder the translation of
research into innovations. This could
include legal, financial, or technical
risks.16
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Communication and Dissemination: How suitable are the
measures to maximise expected outcomes and impacts, including
communication activities, for raising awareness about the project
results’ potential to establish new markets and/or address global
challenges?
2.1 Long-term impact
Provide a narrative explaining how the project’s results are
expected to make a difference in terms of impact, beyond the
immediate scope and duration of the project. The narrative should
include the components below, tailored to your project:
a) Describe the transformative positive effects that the
envisioned new technology, if achieved in the long term, would
have on our economy, environment and society. How significant
these transformative effects are?
• The expected outcome of your project is a validation of scientific
and technological basis of envisaged future technology through
demonstration of its proof of principle.
Communication and dissemination
are crucial aspects of research
projects, especially when it comes to
maximizing expected outcomes and
impacts.
Evaluation of Communication Impact:
Implement metrics and evaluation
mechanisms to assess the impact
of your communication efforts. This
includes tracking media coverage,
social media engagement, and any
notable outcomes resulting from the
communication strategy.
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“Considering the many unknowns at
such early stages of the innovation
process, it is assumed that applications
deriving from your idea cannot be
presented in full detail. The impact
arising from Pathfinder projects in
terms of exploitation is not expected to
be addressed or achieved in the course
of the project but rather on the longer
term. That is why we expect you to
explain in your application what are
the potential transformative positive
effects that your envisioned new
technology would have to our economy,
environment and society.”
Try to develop plans for the effective
transfer of research outcomes and
innovations to the market. This may
involve collaboration with industry
partners, licensing agreements, or
establishing spin-off companies.17
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
• Be specific, referring to the effects of your project, and not
R&I in general in this field.
• The outcomes and potential for future impact of your project
may be, e.g., in terms of creating new markets, improve our
lives or address global challenges, but they are not expected
to be addressed or achieved within the project lifetime. Only
include such outcomes and impacts where your project would
make a significant and direct contribution. Avoid describing
very tenuous links to wider impacts. However, include any
potential negative environmental outcome or impact of the
project including when expected results are brought at scale
(such as at commercial level). Where relevant, explain how
the potential harm can be managed.
b) Describe any requirements and potential barriers-arising
from factors beyond the scope and duration of the project-
that may determine whether the desired outcomes and impacts
are achieved. These may include, for example, other R&I work
within and beyond Horizon Europe; regulatory environment;
targeted markets; user behaviour. Indicate if these factors might
evolve overtime. Describe any mitigating measures you propose,
within or beyond your project, that could be needed should
your assumptions prove to be wrong, or to address identified
barriers.
• Note that this does not include the critical risks inherent to the
management of the project itself, which should be described
below under ‘Implementation’.
Targeted Problem-Solving:
Identify specific challenges or issues
within the chosen field that your
project aims to address. Clearly
articulate how your project’s solutions
are tailored to meet the unique needs
of the field in question.
Try to address Field-Specific
Challenges: clearly communicate how
your project tackles specific challenges
or limitations that are characteristic of
the chosen field.
Emphasize the uniqueness of your
approach and solutions;
Provide evidence of the project’s
relevance to industry needs and
its potential to create new markets
within the specified field. Include
market analyses and strategies for
industry adoption;
By addressing these external
requirements and potential barriers,
researchers and project planners
can better anticipate challenges and
develop strategies to enhance the
resilience and adaptability of the
project, ultimately contributing to the
achievement of desired outcomes and
impacts.
Regulatory and Legal Requirements:
Try to identify and understand existing
and potential future regulatory and
legal requirements that may affect
the project outcomes. Changes in
regulations or the introduction of 18
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
2.2 Innovation potential
• Describe the exploitation measures to facilitate future
translation of research results into innovations.
• Shortly describe the measures for a plausible path to
new laws could impact the project’s
ability to operate or implement certain
solutions;
Policy Changes:
Are there any policy developments at
regional, national, and international
levels that need to be considered?
(Changes in government policies or
priorities can influence the project’s
relevance and alignment with broader
goals)
Market Dynamics:
Take into account market trends and
dynamics related to the project’s
objectives. Shifts in market conditions,
consumer preferences, or industry
practices can impact the feasibility and
success of the project.
Technological Advancements:
Consider the pace of technological
advancements that may occur
during and after the project. Rapid
developments in related technologies
could influence the competitiveness
and relevance of the project’s
outcomes.
Public Perception and Acceptance:
Consider public attitudes and
perceptions related to the
project. Public acceptance, ethical
considerations, or concerns about the
project’s societal impacts can influence
its success and long-term sustainability.
Cultural and Social Changes:
Be aware of cultural and social changes
that may influence the acceptance and
adoption of project outcomes. Cultural
shifts or societal changes can impact
the project’s relevance and resonance
with stakeholders;
Intellectual Property Landscape:
Monitor changes in the intellectual
property landscape relevant to the
project. New patents, legal disputes, or
shifts in intellectual property strategy .
19
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
commercialise the innovations.
• Beneficiaries must use their best efforts to exploit
their results or have them exploited by a third party,
in priority those established in a Member State or
an Associated country, including through transfer or
licensing.
• If exploitation is expected primarily in non-associated
third countries, justify by explaining how that
exploitation is still in the Union’s interest.
• Specify your strategy for the management of intellectual
property, foreseen protection measures, such as patents,
design rights, copyright, trade secrets, etc. How adequate are
they to support exploitation?
• Clear description of necessary measures to allow
future uptake, for instance through an adequate form
of protection of the generated Intellectual Property
(IP) is expected.
• If your project is selected for funding, you will need
an appropriate consortium agreement to manage
(amongst other things) the ownership and access to key
knowledge (IPR, research data etc.). Where relevant,
these will allow you, collectively and individually, to
pursue market opportunities arising from the project.
• If your project is selected, you must indicate the
owner(s) of the results (results ownership list) in the
final periodic report.
• Explain the measures the consortium will implement for
involving and empowering key actors (such as excellent early-
career researchers or promising high-tech SMEs, including start-
ups) that have the potential to take the lead in translating
research into innovations.
2.3 Communication and dissemination
• Describe the dissemination and communication measures that
are planned, and the target group(s)addressed (e.g. scientific
community, end users, financial actors, public at large) for
raising awareness about the project’s outcomes.
• Project results should include top-level scientific
publications in Open Access.
• In case your proposal is selected for funding, a detailed
plan for dissemination and exploitation including
communication activities’ will need to be provided as
a mandatory project deliverable within 6 months after
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“The primary goal of the EIC Pathfinder
is to develop the scientific basis to
underpin breakthrough technologies,
thus focusing on early-stage research
needed to achieve the proof of principle
that the envisaged technologies are
feasible. Given the focus on research,
one of the major outputs of Pathfinder
projects are expected to be top-level
scientific publications in open access.
However, before deciding to publish
the research results, it is important
to assess the innovation potential of
the results and to ensure an adequate
formal protection of the generated
Intellectual Property (e.g. via a patent
application). ”
It is highly recommended to identify
your key target groups, including
the technical/scientific community,
key stakeholders, and the public in
general, ...
Try to identify clearly each type of
action referring to the approximated
number of each action during the
project and justify each type of action
according to each target group.20
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
signature date. This plan shall be periodically updated
in alignment with the project’s progress.
• Communication measures should promote the project
throughout the full lifespan of the project. The aim
is to inform and reach out to society and show the
activities performed, and the use and the benefits
the project will have for citizens. Activities must be
strategically planned, with clear objectives, start
at the outset and continue through the lifetime of
the project. The description of the communication
activities needs to state the main messages as well as
the tools and channels that will be used to reach out to
each of the chosen target groups.
• All measures should be proportionate to the scale
of the project, and should contain concrete actions
to be implemented both during and after the end of
the project, e.g. standardization activities. Your plan
should give due consideration to the possible follow-up
of your project, once itis finished. In the justification,
explain why each measure chosen is best suited to
reach the target group addressed.
• Describe possible feedback to policy measures
generated by the project that will contribute to
designing, monitoring, reviewing and rectifying (if
necessary) existing policy and programmatic measures
or shaping and supporting the implementation of new
policy initiatives and decisions.
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION
Quality and efficiency of the implementation–aspects to be taken
into account (Evaluation criteria)
• Work plan: How coherent and effective are the work plan
(work packages, tasks,deliverables, milestones, timeline, etc.)
and risk mitigation measures in order to achieve the project
objectives?
• Allocation of resources: How appropriate and effective is the
allocation of resources (comprising person-months and other
cost items) to work packages and consortium members?
• Quality of the consortium: To what extent do the consortium
members have all the necessary high-quality expertise for
performing the project tasks?
3.1 Work plan and allocation of resources
• Please provide the following:
- brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan;21
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
- timing of the different work packages and their components
(Gantt chart or similar).
• Please use the below table when planning Reporting Periods for
your project:
• graphical presentation of the components showing how they
inter-relate (Pert chart or similar).
• detailed work description, i.e.:
• a list of work packages (table 3.1a);
• a description of each work package (table 3.1b);
• a list of deliverables (table 3.1c);
• Give full details. Base your account on the
logical structure of the project and the stages in
which it is to be carried out. The number of work
packages should be proportionate to the scale
and complexity of the project.
• You should give enough detail in each work
package to justify the proposed resources to
be allocated and also quantified information so
that progress can be monitored, including by the
Commission.
This table is for information purposes
only. Not needed to be included in the
final version of your proposal.
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“From a legal point of view, there is
no maximum duration. In general, the
length of a project should be “fit for
purpose”, that means in accordance
with your work packages, tasks and
goals and of course the proposed
budget. In practice, you will have to
carefully plan what you can achieve
with the indicative EU contribution that
is set to a maximum of EUR 3 million
(or more if duly justified) for Pathfinder
Open.
Looking at the previous two Pathfinder
Open calls for proposals (2021 and
2022), we funded only one project with
a duration of only 2 years and a few
longer ones of 5 years. Most projects
however had durations between 3 and
4 years.”
When drawing a pert chart, please
note that the meaning should be
obvious to the reader. Ask friends who
are not working on the project for
feedback.
Pay attention to the consistency of
the work plan in terms of resources,
distribution of work between partners
and person-months.
Have an interconnection between
tasks and deliverables. You can
include, for instance, a project
management table and an
organizational table, detailing the
team members and their roles in each;
Pay attention to the milestones: 22
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
• Resources(person-months) assigned to work
packages should be in line with their objectives
and deliverables. You are advised to include a
distinct work package on ‘project management’,
and to give due visibility in the workplan to ‘data
management’ ‘dissemination and exploitation’
and ‘communication activities’, either with
distinct tasks or distinct work packages.
• You will be required update the ‘plan for
the dissemination and exploitation of results
including communication activities’, and a
‘data management plan’. This should include
a record of activities related to dissemination
and exploitation that have been undertaken and
those still planned.
• Please make sure the information in this section
matches the costs as stated in the budget table
in section 3 of the application forms, and the
number of person months, shown in the detailed
work package descriptions.
• a list of milestones (table 3.1d);
• a list of critical risks, relating to project implementation,
that the stated project’s objectives may not be
achieved. Detail any risk mitigation measures. You will
be able to update the list of critical risks and mitigation
measures as the project progresses (table 3.1e);
• a table showing number of person months required
(table3.1f);
• a table showing description and justification of
subcontracting costs for each participant (table 3.1g);
• a table showing justifications for ‘purchase costs’ (table
3.1h) for participants where those costs exceed 15% of
the personnel costs (according to the budget table in
proposal part A);
• if applicable, a table showing justifications for ‘other
costs categories’ (table 3.1i);
• if applicable, a table showing in-kind contributions
from third parties (table 3.1j).
3.2 Quality of the consortium
The individual participants of the consortium are described in a
separate section under Part A. There is no need to repeat that
information here.
• Describe the expertise of the consortium members. Explain
how it provides all the necessary knowledge, how it supports
the proposed interdisciplinary approach, and how it matches
the project’s objectives and tasks. Explain the role of each
these will serve to support the
identification on major progress
points and, if relevant, could reflect
key technological breakthrough
achievements identified in the
proposal;
All partners should contribute to the
project- keep in mind when allocating
tasks that all participants should have
a valid role and adequate resources to
fulfil this role.
Costs must be reasonable.
Timo Hallantie , EISMEA, Head of Unit
for the EIC Pathfinder programme:
“The requested financial EU contribution
and the project budget should be “fit for
purpose” for successfully completing
your tasks and achieving your goals. We
expect EIC Pathfinder Open projects to
stay within the indicative limit of EUR
3 million, but it might be possible to
request higher amounts which must be
duly justified in the proposal. Our EIC
expert evaluators will carefully assess
those cases during the evaluation.”
Interdisciplinarity in the consortium is
a must! Consortium members should
be complementary and is important to
show the role and responsibility of all
the members.23
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
consortium member and its complementary contribution. If
appropriate, show how this includes expertise in social sciences
and humanities, open science practices, and gender aspects of
R&I.
• Describe how the partners will have access to critical
infrastructure needed to carry out the project activities.
• Other countries and international organisations: If one or more
of the participants requesting EU funding is based in a country
or is an international organisation that is not automatically
eligible for such funding (entities from Member States of the
EU, from Associated Countries and from one of the countries
in the exhaustive list included in Annex 3 of the EIC Work
Programme are automatically eligible for EU funding), explain
why the participation of the entity in question is essential to
successfully carryout the project.
Tables for section 3.1
• Use plain text for the tables in s ection 3.1. If the proposal is
invited to start Grant Agreement preparation, these tables will
have to be encoded in the grant management IT tool, where no
graphics or special formats are supported.
24
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
Please take the table seriously and
think about what could seriously
jeopardise your project. Assess
the risks realistically and formulate
strategies to minimise them. Please
note that in a high-risk project there
should not only be risks categorised as
medium or low.

It is crucial to emphasize that
subcontracting actions should not
involve any essential developments
that the consortia could achieve
on its own. Doing so may expose
potential shortcomings in the current
consortia’s capabilities, thereby
undermining the credibility of your
proposal.25
ANNOTATED PROPOSAL TEMPLATE EIC PATHFINDER OPEN - 2024
ANNEXES TO PROPOSAL PART B
Some calls may ask to upload annexes to proposal part B. The
annexes must be uploaded as separate documents in the submission
system. The most common annexes to be uploaded in Horizon
Europe are (standard templates are published in the Funding &
Tenders portal):
• CLINICAL TRIALS: Annex with information on clinical trials.
• FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO THIRD PARTIES: Annex with information
on financial support to third parties.
• CALLS FLAGGED AS SECURITY SENSITIVE: Annex with information
on security aspects.
• ETHICS: ethics self-assessment should be included in proposal
part A. However, in calls where several serious ethics issues are
expected, the character limited in this section of proposal part
A may not be sufficient for participants to give all necessary
information. In those cases, participants may include additional
information in an annex to proposal part B.
Notes
This project has received funding from the European Union’s DG RTD - Horizon Europe
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 101046298
ACCESS2EIC is a 84-months coordination and support action aimed to empower and facilitate
transnational cooperation within the network of National Contact Points – NCPs focused on the
Horizon Europe  European Innovation Council – EIC and the European Innovation Ecosystems -
EIE. It involves a consortium made of formally appointed NCPs.
ACCESS2EIC comprise a network of 16 partners:
1. AGENZIA PER LA PROMOZIONE DELLA RICERCA EUROPEA (APRE), Italy
2. CENTRO PARA EL DESARROLLO TECNOLOGICO INDUSTRIAL (CDTI), Spain
3. OSTERREICHISCHE FORSCHUNGSFORDERUNGSGESELLSCHAFT MBH (FFG), Austria
4. INSTYTUT PODSTAWOWYCH PROBLEMOW TECHNIKI POLSKIEJ AKADEMII NAUK (IPPT PAN), Poland
5. NATIONAL TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION AUTHORITY (IIA), Israel
6. DEUTSCHES ZENTRUM FUER LUFT – UND RAUMFAHRT EV (DLR), Germany
7. INNOVASJON NORGE (IN), Norway
8. BPIFRANCE FINANCEMENT SA (BPIFRANCE), France
9. IDRYMA TECHNOLOGIAS KAI EREVNAS (FORTH), Greece
10. ENTERPRISE IRELAND (EI), Ireland
11. ANI – AGENCIA NACIONAL DE INOVACAO, SA (ANI), Portugal
12. GIS-TRANSFERCENTER FOUNDATION (GIS-TC), Bulgaria
13. CENTRUM VEDECKO TECHNICKYCH INFORMACII SLOVENSKEJ REPUBLIKY (CVTISR), Slovakia
14. NEMZETI KUTATASI FEJLESZTESI ES INNOVACIOS HIVATAL (NKFIH), Hungary
15. TECHNOLOGICKE CENTRUM AKADEMIE VED CESKE REPUBLIKY (TC CAS), Czechia
16. MINISTÈRE DE L’ENSEIGNEMENT SUPÉRIEUR, DE LA RECHERCHE ET DE L’INNOVATION (MESRI), France
Access2EIC
www.access2eic.eu