IT-Infrastructure UMMD / Handling of research data



Research data will comprise newly generated data including (add here: type of data, or mention if existing data is used)  as well as (add here: type of data). (In case further parameters are gathered, you may state them here). All respective data which will be generated, analyzed and stored locally on computers at the University Medicine Magdeburg. To ensure high data quality, samples are processed and analyzed following standard operation procedures and documented alongside respective metadata in a standard labjournal. Raw data formats include (name the file endings of generated files) and will be archived as (name long-term file formats here, they could be non-proprietary formats). The overall amount of generated data will approximately be XX TB. Locally stored data is further transferred within the network of the university to a long-term storage cluster of the data integration center (DIC) at the University Medicine Magdeburg and also backuped there. 

The high diversity of data samples as well as the huge file size requires an adequate IT infrastructure for sharing of tools, protocols, results and (meta)data among partner members, and ultimately with the international scientific community and the general public. To fulfill these needs, Magdeburg University has made major investments in the expansion of the IT infrastructure and establishment of the DIC of the University Medicine Magdeburg, Research Data Management (RDM) resources, including an interdisciplinary CIO board, a dedicated working group for RDM, the standardization of RDM processes and policies (fdm.ovgu.de) in line with FAIR principles, good scientific practice and data handling guidelines of the DFG (code of conduct), Helmholtz Society and the Leibniz Foundation, the General Data Protection Regulation of the EU (GDPR) and German Datenschutz-Grundverordnung (DSGVO). By connecting the local and cross-location user directory service, the generated research data can be released to the respective research group in a personalized manner and secured by authentication in the revision context. To enable data management in the context of interdisciplinary collaboration with other faculties at the OVGU, the knowledge management and collaboration system Confluence was procured and established in 2019. Every institute, clinic and central facility has access. This system is used to manage data management plans and document the sustainable storage and further processing of research data.

Publication of research findings is planned alongside the project and will support open access policies. In order to facilitate re-use and long-term accessibility of data and corresponding meta data, a repository on GitLab-base following FAIR principles will be provided by the DIC to optimally accompany research projects from the closed up starting phase to the end phase including open access publishing.

While data storage and backup is provided by the DIC, each person working on the project is independently responsible to generate, document, analyze and locally store the data with respective metadata. The project coordinator is in charge of archiving data and curating the data after the project end.